[WIP] Upgrading dependencies, cleaning up, first take (#1135)
dfinity/examples: rust/basic_bitcoin/README.md

# Basic Bitcoin

This example demonstrates how to deploy a smart contract on the Internet Computer that can receive and send Bitcoin, including support for legacy (P2PKH), SegWit (P2WPKH), and Taproot (P2TR) address types.

## Architecture

This example integrates with the Internet Computer's built-in:

- [ECDSA API](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#ic-ecdsa_public_key)
- [Schnorr API](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#ic-sign_with_schnorr)
- [Bitcoin API](https://github.com/dfinity/bitcoin-canister/blob/master/INTERFACE_SPECIFICATION.md)

> For background on the ICP <-> BTC integration, refer to the [Bitcoin integration documentation](https://wiki.internetcomputer.org/wiki/Bitcoin_Integration).

Reviewer: did you align on @jessiemongeon1 with this? wondering if we'd want to prefer to refer to the learn hub 🤔 

```suggestion
For background on the ICP <-> BTC integration, refer to the [Learn Hub](https://learn.internetcomputer.org/hc/en-us/articles/34211154520084-Bitcoin-Integration).
```

## Prerequisites

- [x] [Rust toolchain](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install)
- [x] [Internet Computer SDK](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/building-apps/getting-started/install)

> - [x] [Local installation of Bitcoin](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/bitcoin) 

Reviewer: link seems to be broken, I suggested another one (cc @jessiemongeon1)

```suggestion
- [x] [Local installation of Bitcoin](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/building-apps/chain-fusion/bitcoin/using-btc/local-development) 
```

Reviewer: I can only review what exists today 😁

```bash
bitcoin-cli -conf=$(pwd)/bitcoin.conf generatetoaddress 1 <bitcoin_address>
```

## 4. Checking balance

Check the balance of any Bitcoin address:

```bash
dfx canister call basic_bitcoin get_balance '("<bitcoin_address>")'
```

This uses `bitcoin_get_balance` and works for any supported address type. Requires at least one confirmation to be reflected.

## 5. Sending bitcoin

You can send BTC using the following endpoints:

- `send_from_p2pkh_address`
- `send_from_p2wpkh_address`
- `send_from_p2tr_key_path_only_address`
- `send_from_p2tr_script_path_enabled_address_key_spend`
- `send_from_p2tr_script_path_enabled_address_script_spend`

Each endpoint internally:

1. Estimates fees
2. Looks up spendable UTXOs
3. Builds a transaction to the target address
4. Signs using ECDSA or Schnorr, depending on address type
5. Broadcasts the transaction using `bitcoin_send_transaction`

Example:

```bash
dfx canister call basic_bitcoin send_from_p2pkh_address '(record {
  destination_address = "tb1ql7w62elx9ucw4pj5lgw4l028hmuw80sndtntxt";
  amount_in_satoshi = 4321;
})'
```

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > Newly created bitcoin, like those you created with the above `bitcoin-cli` command cannot be spent until 10 additional blocks have been added to the chain. To make your bitcoin spendable, create 10 additional blocks. Choose one of the smart contract addresses as receiver of the block reward or use any valid bitcoin dummy addres.

Reviewer: small typo

```suggestion
> Newly created bitcoin, like those you created with the above `bitcoin-cli` command cannot be spent until 10 additional blocks have been added to the chain. To make your bitcoin spendable, create 10 additional blocks. Choose one of the smart contract addresses as receiver of the block reward or use any valid bitcoin dummy address.
```

# Basic Bitcoin

This example demonstrates how to deploy a canister smart contract on the Internet Computer that can receive and send Bitcoin, including support for legacy (P2PKH), SegWit (P2WPKH), and Taproot (P2TR) address types.

## Architecture

This example integrates with the Internet Computer's built-in:

- [ECDSA API](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#ic-ecdsa_public_key)
- [Schnorr API](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#ic-sign_with_schnorr)
- [Bitcoin API](https://github.com/dfinity/bitcoin-canister/blob/master/INTERFACE_SPECIFICATION.md)

> For background on the ICP <-> BTC integration, refer to the [Bitcoin integration documentation](https://wiki.internetcomputer.org/wiki/Bitcoin_Integration).

Author: Yes, but that link don't exist yet, right? There are some other links that need to be updated later as well.

## Prerequisites

- [x] [Rust toolchain](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install)
- [x] [Internet Computer SDK](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/building-apps/getting-started/install)

> - [x] [Local installation of bitcoin](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/bitcoin) 

Reviewer 2: We should add a disclaimer that the regtest with dfx won't work with this example

> - [x] [Local installation of bitcoin](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/bitcoin) 

Author: Doesn't it? I haven't tried.

> - [x] [Local installation of bitcoin](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/bitcoin) 

Reviewer 2: I could not get it to work yesterday when I was testing it.

- [x] On MacOS, an `llvm` version that supports the `wasm32-unknown-unknown` target is required. The default `llvm` version provided by XCode does not meet that requirement. Instead, install the [Homebrew version](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/llvm), using `brew install llvm`. This is because the `bitcoin` library relies on `secp256k1-sys`, which requires `llvm` to build.

## Step 1: Building and deploying the canister

### Clone the repo

```bash
git clone https://github.com/dfinity/examples
cd examples/rust/basic_bitcoin
```

### Start the local IC replica

```bash
dfx start --clean --background
```

### Start the local bitcoin testnet

In a separate terminal window, run the following: 

```bash
bitcoind -conf=$(pwd)/bitcoin.conf -datadir=$(pwd)/bitcoin_data --port=18444
```

### Deploy the canister

```bash
dfx deploy basic_bitcoin --argument '(variant { regtest })'
```

What this does:

> - `dfx deploy` tells the command line interface to `deploy` the smart contract.

Reviewer 2: The terms canister and smart contract are not used consistently throughout this doc. First, 'canister smart contract' is used, then it is shortened to 'canister,' and here it is just 'smart contract.' We should pick one and use it consistently.

Author: Went with "smart contract"

- `--argument '(variant { regtest })'` passes the argument `regtest` to initialize the smart contract, telling it to connect to the local Bitcoin regtest network.

> ### Done!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

Your canister is live and ready to use! You can interact with it using either the command line or using the Candid UI, which is the link you see in the terminal.

> [!NOTE]

> > You can also interact with a pre deployed version of the `basic_bitcoin` example. The canister is deployed to IC mainnet and is configured to interact with Bitcoin **testnet4**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> You can also interact with a pre-deployed version of the `basic_bitcoin` example running on the IC mainnet and configured to interact with Bitcoin **testnet4**.
```

> 
> Access the Candid UI of the example: https://a4gq6-oaaaa-aaaab-qaa4q-cai.raw.icp0.io/?id=vvha6-7qaaa-aaaap-ahodq-cai

## 2. Supported Bitcoin address types

This example demonstrates how to generate and use the following address types:

> 1. **P2PKH (Legacy)** — using ECDSA and `sign_with_ecdsa`
> 2. **P2WPKH (SegWit v0)** — using ECDSA and `sign_with_ecdsa`
> 3. **P2TR (Taproot, key-path-only)** — using Schnorr keys and `sign_with_schnorr`
> 4. **P2TR (Taproot, script-path-enabled)** — commits to a script allowing both key path and script path spending

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **P2PKH (Legacy)** using ECDSA and `sign_with_ecdsa`
2. **P2WPKH (SegWit v0)** using ECDSA and `sign_with_ecdsa`
3. **P2TR (Taproot, key-path-only)** using Schnorr keys and `sign_with_schnorr`
4. **P2TR (Taproot, script-path-enabled)** commits to a script allowing both key path and script path spending
```

Use the Candid UI or command line to generate these addresses with:

```bash
dfx canister call basic_bitcoin get_p2pkh_address
# or get_p2wpkh_address, get_p2tr_key_path_only_address, get_p2tr_script_path_enabled_address
```

> ## 3. Receiving Bitcoin

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 3. Receiving bitcoin
```

> Use the `bitcoin-cli` to mine a bitcoin block and send the block reward in the form of local testnet bitcoin to one of the canister addresses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the `bitcoin-cli` to mine a Bitcoin block and send the block reward in the form of local testnet BTC to one of the canister addresses.
```

```bash
bitcoin-cli -conf=$(pwd)/bitcoin.conf generatetoaddress 1 <bitcoin_address>
```

## 4. Checking balance

Check the balance of any Bitcoin address:

```bash
dfx canister call basic_bitcoin get_balance '("<bitcoin_address>")'
```

This uses `bitcoin_get_balance` and works for any supported address type. Requires at least one confirmation to be reflected.

> ## 5. Sending Bitcoin

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 5. Sending bitcoin
```

You can send BTC using the following endpoints:

- `send_from_p2pkh_address`
- `send_from_p2wpkh_address`
- `send_from_p2tr_key_path_only_address`
- `send_from_p2tr_script_path_enabled_address_key_spend`
- `send_from_p2tr_script_path_enabled_address_script_spend`

> Each endpoint internally:

Reviewer 2: Could we add output messages for these steps? It might be useful to show whats happening instead of just getting an address with no context, and if the dev doesn't read this entire doc and just plays with the code, then they might miss this important info

Author: What do you mean with output messages?

Reviewer 2: Like CLI output that details the background steps, like:
"Estimating fees..."
"Looking up spendable UTXOs..."
"Building transaction..."
"Signing transaction..."
"Sending transaction to Bitcoin API..."
"Transaction sent"

5. Broadcasts the transaction using `bitcoin_send_transaction`

Example:

```bash
dfx canister call basic_bitcoin send_from_p2pkh_address '(record {
  destination_address = "tb1ql7w62elx9ucw4pj5lgw4l028hmuw80sndtntxt";
  amount_in_satoshi = 4321;
})'
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Newly created bitcoin, like those you created with the above `bitcoin-cli` command cannot be spent until 10 additional blocks have been added to the chain. To make your bitcoin spendable, create 10 additional blocks. Choose one of the canister addresses as receiver of the block reward or use any valid bitcoin dummy addres.
> 
> ```bash
> bitcoin-cli -conf=$(pwd)/bitcoin.conf generatetoaddress 10 <bitcoin_address>
> ```

The function returns the transaction ID, which you can track on [mempool.space testnet4](https://mempool.space/testnet4/).

## 6. Retrieving block headers

You can query historical block headers:

```bash
dfx canister call basic_bitcoin get_block_headers '(10: nat32)'
# or a range:
dfx canister call basic_bitcoin get_block_headers '(0: nat32, 11: nat32)'
```

This calls `bitcoin_get_block_headers`, useful for validating blockchains or light client logic.

> ## Notes on Implementation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Notes on implementation
```

> - Keys are derived using structured derivation paths, according to BIP-32.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Keys are derived using structured derivation paths according to BIP-32.
```

- Key caching is used to avoid repeated calls to `get_ecdsa_public_key` and `get_schnorr_public_key`.
- Transactions are assembled and signed manually, ensuring maximum flexibility in construction and fee estimation.

## Conclusion

In this tutorial, you were able to:

> - Deploy a canister smart contract on the ICP blockchain that can receive & send bitcoin.

Reviewer 2: We deployed locally, not to the mainnet.

> - Acquire cycles to deploy the canister to the ICP mainnet.

Reviewer 2: We did not acquire cycles

> - Connect the canister to the Bitcoin testnet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Connect the canister to the local Bitcoin testnet.
```
